http://www.entropysite.com/morrison.html

From: Proceedings of the Chicago Conferences on Liberal Education, Number 1, Undergraduate Education in Chemistry and Physics (edited by Marian R. Rice). The College Center for Curricular Thought: The University of Chicago, (October 18-19, 1986).

The Lecture System in Teaching Science
Robert T. Morrison
New York University

I must warn you that, since I am an organic chemist, I plan to fill all eight of these blackboards at least twice, and I expect you to get it all down.

You laughed! Fine. Now I don't have to give my talk. I described the lecture system to you and you think it's as ridiculous as I do.

I must confess that the title of my talk is a bit misleading. When I was growing up during the Depression, there was a publisher -- in Kansas City, I believe -- named E. Haldeman-Julius, and he brought out Little Blue Books. You would see full-page ads in the newspaper: AT LAST! BOOKS ARE CHEAPER THAN HAMBURGERS! And they were-or as cheap. For a nickel, you could get a book on Esperanto, or Freud, or even Maxim Gorki's Twenty-six Sex-Mad Men and a Girl. (I bought that one before I found out that they had taken liberties with the title.) In these ads, books were listed by category: science, history, religion, and so on. And under "Religion," you would find such titles as The Fallacy of Christianity or Why I Am an Atheist.

My talk is about the lecture system in the same way that those books were about religion. Perhaps I should have paraphrased Bertrand Russell by calling my talk "The Fallacy of Lecturing," or "Why I Am an Unbeliever in the Lecture System. "

What I am going to say is based mostly on my experience in organic chemistry, both as a student and as a teacher. In my opinion, it applies equally well to teaching any beginning science, or any other beginning subject, for that matter. Organic chemists know more about the abuses of the lecture system than anyone else because traditionally, we have been the worst offenders.

Let me begin by describing a little scene to you. This scene is set in a beginning organic chemistry classroom. The time is any time from a hundred years ago to this very afternoon. The professor has come into the room and is looking out at the class. There may be forty students, there may be four hundred students -- it really doesn't matter. In fact, he could be looking into a television camera and teaching all the beginning organic students in the country.

The bell rings, and the professor shuffles his dog-eared notes -- they're twenty, even thirty years old, but they're just as good as the day he first wrote them. The students come to attention, notebooks opened and pencils poised; they're ready to go. The professor clears his throat, and the pencils move. He says "Good morning," and the pencils begin to move in earnest. Then he turns toward the blackboard and starts to talk. And as he talks, he writes. As he writes, the students write. Whatever he writes, they write. When he draws an arrow, they draw an arrow; when he underlines a word, they underline a word. He finishes one section of the board and goes on to the next. He continues until he reaches the lower right-hand comer of the last section. Then he erases the board, or pushes it up, and away he goes again.

For a time, all goes well. The professor knows this material cold. He should; he's given the identical lecture dozens of times before. If the students start to show restlessness, or worse, look as though they're about to ask questions, he can always speed up the tempo and take care of that. (When I first arrived at New York University over thirty-five years ago, an older colleague actually gave me that advice. He said, "If you. have any trouble with your class, just talk a little faster; that'll keep them in line.")

The students have nothing to complain about. Their seats are comfortable, the ventilation and heating are adequate. The lecturer, if he's a good one, has a loud, clear voice, and his handwriting is not too illegible. He goes slowly enough for them to get most of it down, but fast enough to keep them out of mischief.

Suddenly, disaster strikes! A student drops his pencil! He gropes for it frantically. He can expect no help from his classmates; it's sauve qui peut with this crowd. If he finds the pencil immediately, he's all right; but if it takes more than a few minutes he's had it. He might just as well go back to his room and sleep it off.

Back in his room he probably has a copy of the textbook for the course. If you were to take it down and open it, you might find that the first few pages had been read, but if you open it in the middle, there would be a creak and you would be in virgin territory. If the student is a thinking sort of person, it just might occur to him that perhaps he would have been better off if he had never gone to class in the first place. He could have stayed at home and studied the book. But he'd soon reject that idea! It would never do to have empty pages in that magic notebook. He might even study something that wasn't going to be on the examination.

However, the lost pencil episode is not a disaster. If he has a friend in the class who is a good stenographer and a good student, he can borrow the day's notes from him. You sometimes wonder why the whole class doesn't hire a stenographer to take it all down so they could all stay at home. Or they could play softball or go surfing, activities that are healthy. At the end of the day they'd be just about where they would have been if they had gone to class, and they would have a better, more professional set of notes.

Meanwhile, back at the classroom, the lecture is drawing to a close. Just as the bell rings, the lecturer, if he's a really smooth operator, comes to the end of a sentence, a paragraph, a nice neat unit. He lays down his last piece of chalk ¿ he knows exactly how many pieces the lecture will take ¿ picks up his precious lecture notes, and goes out. The students, tired but happy, rise up and follow after him. Their heads are empty, but their notebooks are full. Their necks are a little tired; it's been like a sort of vertical tennis match: board, notebook, board, notebook. But other than that, everything is all right. Any student will tell you, "I never had any trouble with the course until the first examination." There hasn't been a chance to ask any questions, but that's all right; they haven't any questions to ask, anyhow. They've been so busy writing hey haven't had time to think about what was being said; it ran in their ears and out their pencils.

What I have just described is perhaps exaggerated, but not much. You wonder how on earth such a system ever arose because you know very well that nobody in his right mind would invent a system like this today. What I've heard, and I imagine that this is correct, is that it started a very long time ago, when books were rare and very expensive, and the only way to transmit information was for the teacher, who knew, to tell the students, who did not yet know. And they would write it all down and take it away with them, like a bunch of scribes. Remember, scribes were very big in the Middle Ages.

Things have changed a great deal in the past five hundred years. Nowadays there are plenty of books around. They're not exactly given away, but they're still the cheapest item in a student's budget.

So why, then, have we clung to this outdated system? There are undoubtedly a number of reasons, and I want to come back to some of these shortly when I talk about the alternative to this system. But the basic reason, I think, is sheer habit. Our teachers lectured to us, and so we lecture to our students, and they will lecture to theirs, and so on. Coupled with habit is just plain laziness. It is always easier to go on doing what you've been doing and what everybody else is doing than to do something new. This is especially true if what you have been doing is lecturing. Nothing in the world is easier than giving a nice, smooth lecture, especially when the lecture is an old, familiar friend. It's sort of soothing. You know that on November the 6th you'll be discussing the nitration of benzene, and that gives you something to cling to in a changing world.

What is the alternative to this dreadful, wasteful dictation and note-taking? When Boyd and I brought out our first edition in 1959, we were faced with the question of what to do with our class time. The book was based on our lectures which were simply dictated and transcribed and cleaned up a bit. It seemed ridiculous to go into class and simply repeat what was already available in the book. It seemed even sillier to go to class and dictate the contents of a second book, when the students already had all they could possibly handle in one book. (I've heard of this being done. I believe it's called enrichment. I call it overwhelming the student.)

Then, at a meeting in Atlantic City, I happened to run into Frank Lambert.  Frank had been a graduate student over in Jones when I was here, and he was then teaching at Occidental College in California. He was giving a talk on this very subject. He was urging what he called "the Gutenberg Method" of teaching -- because, of course, it was based on the fact that the printing press had been invented several hundred years ago. Frank became my guru. I still mentally bow toward the west when this subject comes up.

I found out that other people had thought about this problem and were actually doing something about it. Not many -- just a small band of dedicated men and women scattered throughout the country who were fighting an uphill battle against the system. From time to time you will see articles in the Journal of Chemical Education on this. George Adkinson, at Waterloo University in Ontario, wrote an article called "Stop Talking and Let the Students Learn to Learn." He refers to the use of what he calls Bound Optimallly Organized Knowledge, known by the acronym of BOOK. (He also comments on the interesting use of the word "cover" ¿ as in "What did you cover in lecture today?" Presumably teaching should involve, not covering, but uncovering.)

What does the Gutenberg Method involve? Simply this. You assign the students portions of the textbook to study before they come to class. When they come into the classroom, they are already acquainted with the material. You don't waste your time, and theirs, outlining the course. You don't waste time telling them that butyric acid smells like rancid butter, and that valeric acid smells like old socks, and other difficult intellectual concepts. The textbook has taken all that drudgery off your hands. You don't waste your time doing what Frank Lambert calls "presenting a boardful of elegantly organized material with beautiful answers to questions that the students have not asked."

The students have read the material, they have thought about it, and they have questions to ask about it. You answer these questions, or, better still, try to get them to answer their own questions, or get other students to give the answers. You ask questions. You have a discussion. If they're slow to come alive, you take up points that you know give students trouble. You lead them through difficult problems. The entire class hour becomes like those few golden moments at the end of an old-fashioned lecture when a few students manage to rise above the system and gather around your desk.

It isn't easy at first. Not for you, and not for the students. It used to be that at least in high school the students learned something in class. But now the lecture system has trickled down insidiously to the high schools. Today students are almost as wedded to the lecture system as the teachers are. They come to college expecting lectures and, come what may, they're going to take notes. Well, it beats thinking, doesn't it? You have to be serious about the Gutenberg Method and you have to be seen to be serious about it. I've had to pry pencils out of hot little hands. I have had to tell them, "Look. I promise. If I give you any important information that isn't in the book, I'll tell you, so you can write it down."

Now, whatever the learning process involves, I think everyone will agree that the first step is the transmittal of information. And here, I believe, you have two alternatives. On the one hand, this initial transfer of information can take place in a crowded classroom, where the student struggles to hear all that is being said, and read all that is being written, and get it all down, in some form or other, in his grubby little notebook. And then, he takes this garbled, illegible, third-hand version of what he thought the lecturer said, or meant to say, and he tries to study it.

Or, you have the alternative. The initial transmittal of information takes place in the student's room from the pages of a carefully written, legibly printed book. And if the author of the book is any good at all, he will have done a much clearer, more thorough, more accurate job than the best lecturer in the world.  Compared with reading, listening is a horribly inefficient way of getting Information. Think of how little news you actually get in a half-hour "news" broadcast on television. Why, in a half-hour you can read half the New York Times and you can skip or skim what you already know or aren't interested in.

I happen to be a lover of theater. Every so often, my wife and I go on a binge and gorge ourselves on theater the way some people gorge themselves on bacon sandwiches. And theater, at its best, is enormously stimulating and thought-provoking. Still, even at its best, compared with reading, theater is a spectator sport. Reading makes demands on you. You must work at it. And because of the work you do, reading stretches your mind.

Learning, be it chemistry, physics, or biology, is not a spectator sport. A student doesn't learn sitting on the aisle in a lecture room watching a spectacular performance by a star lecturer.

What the Gutenberg Method offers, then, is two things, either of which alone would make it worthwhile. First, you have a better mechanism for the initial transmittal of information, one that is more efficient and more effective. Second, the big bonus and the reason for the Gutenberg Method in the first place is that you gain all that lovely class time for doing what you hardly get to do under the lecture system, and that is teach.

I said that the Gutenberg Method wasn't easy for the students at first. Naturally. They're going to be learning during the class hour, not just scribbling in their notebooks. And learning isn't easy. You get what you pay for. There's no free lunch. But the students will come round. They are, by and large, highly motivated, particularly students in the sciences. If you told a class of premedical students that it would improve their chance of getting into medical school if they learned the contents of the Manhattan Telephone Directory, some of them would sit down happily and get to work. They've got lots of incentive.

It's the teachers who find it particularly hard to switch to the Gutenberg Method. It's more work for them, too -- a lot more. Of course it is. Teaching isn't easy, either. Surely it must occur to every teacher at some time or other that lecturing is a suspiciously easy way to do what must be a tough job.

But I believe that, for a teacher, there is more to this than just having to work harder. I wasn't joking when I said that lecturing is soothing and reassuring to the lecturer. I think that everyone, at least one part of everyone, wants the security of knowing what is going to happen. And you certainly know exactly what is going to happen when you give a lecture -- it's all planned ahead. So there is a reluctance to come down from the stage where you're reciting your prepared lines, and start to exchange ad-lib comments with the audience.

I think that something else is involved here, too. I think all of us, to a greater or lesser extent, indulge in wishful thinking. We lecture to students with the belief, the wish that they are learning. But we put off the moment of truth -- the moment when we find out whether or not we're really getting through to them-until the next examination: a week, a month, maybe longer. And even then, we are cushioned against any shocks we might get, such as finding out that a lot of them are not learning. It's a written examination and, while we may grade the examination, it's still a matter of marks on pieces of paper, just names and grades. 

But when you take the plunge into a discussion, you've moved from a theater to a swimming pool and you're sometimes shocked by the cold water of reality. You find out, not next week or next month, but today, eyeball-to-eyeball, that some students have only the fuzziest idea of what you've been trying to put across. "I can call voices from the vasty deep." "Why, so can I, or so can any man. But will they come when you do call them?"

What I've said so far is my basic thesis. Now I'd like to bring up some qualifications, reservations, and exceptions, though even the exceptions will have exceptions to them. I have rebuttals to objections you haven't had a chance to make yet. You see, this is a real lecture.

First, there is the matter of class size. When you think of "discussion," you think of 20 students, 30 at most. And, ideally, you're right. But Frank Lambert has used the Gutenberg Method successfully with classes of up to 125. Boyd and I have done it with classes of 100, the largest we had. You don't reach every student every day, of course, but you don't do badly. For every student who has a question in a large class, there are probably a dozen others who have the same question, so you're handling theirs, too. The important thing is that whatever you do in class they're paying attention; they're not busy scribbling. Any step you take in the direction of discussion is a vast improvement over lecturing. You may say teachers are expensive, and we can't afford enough of them to handle discussions. I agree that teachers are expensive, and we can't afford to waste the ones we've got on this glorified stenography.

Now, of course, for the Gutenberg Method you must have a book, a book that in general you find acceptable, one that goes along the same lines that you do. But you do not have to agree with everything in it. You may think some things in the book are just plain wrong. That's no problem -- just tell the students what's right. You may feel that some topics are unnecessary. All right, tell the students to omit them. You may feel that some topics are neglected or presented less than perfectly. Fine, you have all that lovely class time available to you to make up for the deficiencies of the book. But if you add new material, you should write it up and hand it out ahead of time. It is all to the good for the students to see that there can be different points of view. Furthermore, they think you're great -- you know more than the guy who wrote the book.

A point about the content of the book, or the content of a course, for that matter. As long as the book does what it does do well, it doesn't really matter if it leaves out some topic unless it is one that is absolutely fundamental. You fill in the gap, and the students have learned enough to be able to handle it.

Now, if you can't find a book that is even remotely acceptable to you, then you have to write your own. That's how books get written. (Well, actually, it's how books get started; they get finished because your third child is on the way, and you have no money to pay the rent.)

The Gutenberg Method, then, is one that uses a book. But if it is to work, the book must be written with this end in mind, or as though this end was in mind. It should not be a reference book jam-packed with ten times the facts and information that a student can hope to learn. It should not be a short, concise summary written to help the student review. It must be written to be the student's initial contact with the subject. New ideas must be introduced as though the students were completely ignorant which, at this stage, they are. Explanations must be full enough, complete enough, that the students can understand them. This means using many words and many pages. Other things being equal, such a book will be long, not because it discusses a great many more topics, but because it deals properly with those it treats.

Now, when Boyd and I brought out the first edition of our book twenty-six years ago, it turned out to be that kind of book. It was long, and it didn't have a whole lot in it by 1959 standards. Somebody said that where older books used a sentence, we used a paragraph. I think he meant that as a compliment. Nowadays, of course, all beginning organic books, including our own, are big -- too big, I think.

But the way our book turned out was due to ignorance, actually to a coincidence of two ignorances -- our own and our publishers. When we wrote the book, neither Boyd nor I had ever really studied or even read a beginning organic book. When we were students, we hadn't used our textbooks; there was too much in them for us to learn. Like everybody else, we took notes faithfully and studied from them. As teachers, we had to help select textbooks for our students, and we must have looked some over a bit, but we were working up a new way to teach organic chemistry, and we couldn't expect much help from any textbook.

When we wrote our book, we wrote it the way we thought all books were written. We explained everything, the way you would in class. We used as many words as seemed necessary to get a point across. We didn't realize how long the book would be because, as we finished chapters, we shipped them off to Boston. 

Now, if our publishers had been old hands at organic chemistry, if, for example, we had been dealing with the clever, sophisticated people who now man the editorial desks, they would have sent that manuscript back to us to compress into a tiny fraction of its size. But, by great good fortune, they didn't know what they were doing either! At the college level, they had only published one science book, a mathematics book, and they hadn't the faintest idea of what to expect of an organic chemistry book. I have probably exchanged as many hot, indignant letters with my editors as anybody alive, but I will be everlastingly grateful to them for keeping their blue pencils away from our first manuscript. Believe me, there can be worse qualities in a publisher than ignorance.

There is the matter of advanced courses or new courses, for which no book is available. But even here, you can liberate the students from note-taking.  You can hand out duplicated notes so that they can be studied before class. Unless you're only an hour or two ahead of the students in your preparation or just winging it in class, you must have something that you can share with the students. You owe them that much. Furthermore, you will have all that material available for writing your new book.

Now you may say, 'What about the stimulating lecturer?" No book can hope to compare with a really stimulating lecturer. My response is that if a teacher is stimulating as a lecturer, think how much more stimulating he can be when he stops dictating and starts teaching. The comparison is not between the teacher and the book; the comparison is between the teacher as lecturer and the teacher as teacher.

What makes a teacher stimulating? Is it really the elegant presentation of a beautifully organized lecture? The students may admire a performance like that, and enjoy it as a tour de force; the lectures may be enormously popular and play to packed houses -- but are admiration and passive enjoyment really what is wanted?

What we really want to do is strike a spark in the students' minds. We want to reveal to them the beauty of ideas and concepts and rationality. The teacher and his personality play the key role in this. But it is not the teacher's wit and polish and delivery that are important. It is the teacher's enthusiasm for the subject that is enormously contagious. It is the students' seeing how a mind better trained than theirs approaches an intellectual problem. It is the intense pleasure the students get when they are led, like Socrates' slave-boy, to use, really use, their own minds. Surely, this is the kind of stimulation that we are looking for.

In my own education, several things stand out. When I was a first-year graduate student here, we had physical chemistry seminars every Monday noon. There was lunch, served by us graduate students. (I've often thought of writing a memoir: Nobel Prize Winners I Have Spilled Soup On.) These seminars weren't really on physical chemistry. They were about all sorts of things; I can remember Rashevsky speaking on mathematical biophysics. So everybody, faculty and graduate students alike, was starting off from scratch. And what has stuck in my memory about these seminars was observing the workings of James Franck's mind. James Franck was, of course, a Nobel prize­winning photochemist, but the questions he asked were simple, direct, and fundamental -- the kinds of questions beginning students sometimes ask. Sometimes the kind, I'm happy to say, that I wanted to ask myself but, as a first-year graduate student, was afraid to. To see that tremendous mind strip away the frills and go directly to the heart of the matter is something I'll never forget.

Later, in the early 1950's, when I had first gone to N.Y.U., there was a series of talks on organic chemistry at the Union Carbide Building in New York. I remember a talk by Christopher Ingold, the famous English chemist, and particularly a very small point he made. He was discussing the mechanism of nitration and the matter of hydrogen bonding in the reaction mixture was raised by a questioner. I can remember Ingold's answer. He pointed out that the solvent, concentrated sulfuric acid, was itself highly hydrogen-bonded. (In my mind's eye I can see him shaking an Erlenmeyer flask, though I know he really bad nothing in his hand.) And he said something like this: "Well, of course, you can see that -- think how viscous it is." And a light bulb went on in my brain! Here was something I had observed a thousand times, something every high school student knows: concentrated sulfuric acid is a thick syrupy liquid. And I knew about hydrogen bonding: you draw a letter "H" and you attach a solid line to one side and a broken line to the other. But I had never before made the connection. Oh, Ingold did a beautiful, elegant job of delivering his talk. But what I remember is that glimpse of a great, very simple mind at work. That was stimulation.

I'm sorry if I seem to have been preaching at you. But this is something I feel very strongly about. For a number of years I've been traveling about, setting up my tent at fairgrounds all around the country, trying to bring religion to the heathen. As I learned many years ago at my sainted mother's knee, there's nothing worse than a reformed drunkard or a reformed whore. For twenty years I used to hit the lecture bottle regularly, four or five times every week. But now, brothers and sisters, I've seen the light, and I've reformed. Hallelujah!



The editorial pages in the Journal of Chemical Education (1963, 40, 173-174) used my ACS talk in Atlantic City to which Morrison referred.  The third paragraph from the end of that talk was plagiarized in C&EN Letters for July 28, 2003 as derived from another source, so evidently the talk is considered generic now!








 




Frank Lambert
August 2006
My discovery of ¿the Gutenberg Method¿

 

Preface

Most instructors today are aware of the teaching procedure so engagingly presented by Morrison: replacement of the absurd conventional lecture by a discussion and problem session because students today have readable texts.  They can pre-study, or at least be familiar with, the material to be covered in that kind of session (if, I would strongly emphasize, they have your personal notes for each chapter to guide them).

Thus, the following naively personal account of my developing a "Gutenberg Method" might appear of little value.  Indeed, it is not important in announcing new details of procedures.  It is important in underscoring the possibilities for a new psychological relationship of instructors to students that develops students' abilities to tackle future complex material on their own.  This factor is far too muffled in the discussions of "Gutenberg" procedures that I have seen.

I would urge anyone using or considering a "Gutenberg" variation and aware of its general components or procedures to scroll rapidly down to the indented paragraphs below.  They describe the most essential aspects of what I believe can be a remarkably more rewarding learning experience for students and professors.

 

As a youngster, I was shy -- never able to talk in front of a group, even a relatively friendly bunch of half a dozen kids in a school or church group.  Up through graduate school in chemistry at the University of Chicago in 1940-42, the only public speaking experience I had was a couple of informal seminars about my research progress before supportive friends in our own professor's group.  (Such graduate seminar presentations on topics significant to a whole department and designed to be confrontational with tough-questioning profs in the front row have been far more rigorous than that everywhere for more than 60 years. I wish I had had such rough training at that time in my life!) 

Therefore, my first lectures in organic chemistry to 250 students at UCLA in January 1948 were terrifying experiences.  Six years after leaving the academic world at the University of Chicago and with military service in WWII plus industrial chemical research and development blurring my focus, I was not truly sharp and in-depth in my subject. Furthermore, not only uncomfortable but unusually unskilled in public speaking, I became literally soaking wet with nervous sweat during each of the lectures in the first week.  Also, in trying to appear free of reading my notes during those initial lectures, I made a few mistakes.  I had to report my goofs to the class the next day.  That was essential; there couldn't be any of my errors in students' notes.  But this was not the way to start a successful teaching career.  I couldn't be perfect, but I didn't feel I was even mediocre.  The problem of survival led me a solution that helped me the rest of my life and resulted in the "Gutenberg Method" of teaching.

I discovered that the different-looking older student up in the back row of those 250 sophomores was a grad in chemistry who was taking complete notes -- including the errors -- of my organic lectures.  He was paid for bringing them to Phi Bete, a very profitable company that sold mimeographed (this was 1948) notes of many courses the late afternoon of a morning lecture. Some time toward the end of that awful first week, I caught up with him and offered to go over his notes rapidly after the lecture, improve them where he hadn't done too well, and correct any errors on my part.  He agreed and I told the students that any slips that I might make would be found to be corrected in the Phi Bete notes.

Then, I had my revelation.  The lecture system was crazy.  What are professors doing in a lecture?  They're outlining and explaining the important points (and wasting time mentioning even obvious points) of the text on the blackboard.  But why?  Gutenberg invented movable type.  That made printed textbooks available 500 years ago -- even now in chemistry rather than alchemy!  Students don't read them?  Of course not, if the whole course is dependent on what the prof puts on a blackboard. They can't pick out the most important ideas and facts from a thousand page text by themselves.  They're beginners.  But why not give them something a bit better than the Phi Bete notes on the day or the week before the class, not really an outline of the text but more of a guide to what's important and what's not in each day's text assignment. Then the students could read a day's assignment and know what to look out for as the key points, understanding that the professor isn't going to outline it on the board.  Instead, the instructor will explain in more detail a few complex things in the assigned pages, answer any questions about them, and show how to conquer problems of the types in the text.  Students would realize that they're going to have to know something about the material of the day or they'll be lost in what's going on. The lecture can change to be mainly a discussion, a genuine question and answer session if there are 50 or fewer students.  At least, even with 250 students, only the most important or problematic sections of the text could be what the professor would explain, simplify, amplify throughout the whole class period. Certainly, there would be a number of questions from students even in such a large group. And there would be no wasting time on board-writing outlines or spending a minute on easily read and understood material. 

Of course, I could neither develop notes for the whole course in advance nor require students to buy Phi Bete notes at UCLA that semester.  But the first class day at Occidental College for summer school in 1948, I began the "Gutenberg Method".  I gave out a notesheet for the next two days. Instead of being a complete outline, its intent was to show and explain some facet that was especially important (particularly if it was a "sleeper" and easily skipped through by a naïve student), to explain a bit about the most complex new material, to state what should just be scanned and not studied, and to point out trivia and tables that could really be omitted.  Everything that was not included/mentioned on the notesheet was assumed to be of average importance: to be read and then studied, and the problems in the particular section solved.  (I urged that, after pre-reading and study, students should get together in small groups, preferably with a portable blackboard to talk out points that they didn't understand.  I didn't realize in 1948 that either then or later this was standard practice in some law and medical schools.)

Then, the class on the next day changed to being a completely different experience than "the lecture".  Its goal was "beating the text" by students -- individually and as a team -- with my role that of the coach, rather than as a lord high professor with a chalk conch shell up in front of ignorant natives.  I would start the assignment of the day by asking for questions concerning the first page(s).  If there were none and if the material was not complex, we went on to the next pages. Discussion was encouraged, but it was not a matter of questions from me to solicit answers from students. There are big patches in texts that are incomprehensible to students. If the professor is unaware of them, she or he must ferret them out.  Classes differ. Not all difficulties are common to all classes, year to year.  The notesheets should change over the years, and probably each year.  When I knew that they probably were not aware of pitfalls in a section, what might appear somewhat obvious but could come back as a "twist" in an exam setting, I showed them what to watch out for.  A major psychological detail was discovering that it was best not to give out notesheets for a longer period than the coming week. Otherwise, the bulk of a month or the dozens of pages for a whole semester would seem to the beginning student like an added hurdle in a new and difficult course rather than an unusual aid.  The timing of looking forward only to the next week or chapter gave the "handout" a sense of coordinated support rather than a forebidding additional load.

The results?  The attitudes of the students in class, the resulting atmosphere in the lecture room, were totally different than most of their classes and my UCLA experience. Of course, every student did not keep up every day.  They had time-variable specific demands and exams from other courses and responsibilities. But they all soon realized that if they didn't catch up as soon as possible, they would be lost in future days.  You can't skip football practice for a week and think you're going to be retained on a team!  Conquering the material was our mutual goal, and I was their coach to help them do it best so their future success could be assured.  I slowly learned that I could say "I don't know" to a student on occasion;  "Let's go check that out in the library after class and report back tomorrow."  (Thanks to a good relationship with the college librarian, I had gained permission to bring all the chemistry holdings to a small library in the chemistry department, an unusual arrangement in a small college.)

In 1959 "my" Gutenberg Method rose to a higher level of success because of the publication of Morrison and Boyd, the text of Robert T. Morrison and Robert N. Boyd that "changed the pedagogy of organic chemistry" as described in the Chem and Engineering News article,  (http://pubs.acs.org/cen/education/83/8341education1.html ). Morrison and I had been friends in grad school at Chicago, but in the spring of 1959 when his text was published, no one could know the lasting impact it would have.  With a dusty blue plain cover, hundreds more pages than two new and four old competitors (but no heavier because of the cheap non-glossy, non-color pages), M&B looked like a loser -- until I read the first chapter and scanned the others.  Texts prior to M&B were sources of information.  M&B had the information (plus a vital blending of modern theory with old reactions, radically new to organic texts in the 1950s) and, most important, on every page they were talking with the students, not at them.  M&B used what I call "we language":  "Let us look", "When we consider", "if we make", "What is so special?" and, for the first time in organic texts, inserted problems in the text after a section.  Finally, the problems at the end of each chapter were unusually extensive and were confidence-building because they started with easy problems but built toward thought-provoking problems involving real-life research data. M&B actualized the Gutenberg Method.  My goal of working successfully with students was reached because students really were able to read and study their text as though master teachers were talking with them.  They were.

A final and extremely important example of the worth of the Gutenberg Method was that my classes were always "on the mark" so far as the plan of pages/chapter per class period, never more than half a period behind the daily schedule of content, and that not too often. To have to hurry to "cover" the last chapter or two of the text at the end of the year was never the case -- unlike many horror stories of the kind I've heard about professors using the standard lecture system. (Omitting essential chapters in a text due to a professor being unable to adhere to a schedule is malfeasance and unacceptable professional performance, I believe.)

All of the foregoing (and the following non-indented paragraphs) constitute an adventure of discovery whose success astonished me, but this was long ago -- beginning in 1948 and rapidly reaching an asymptote after M&B¿s publication in 1959-60!  Thus, modern instructors who glanced at this ancient history may have yawned and, unfortunately, stopped reading before the presnt indented paragraphs. 

Professors may believe that they know all about this "routine":  it's now old stuff to urge students to read a text before the class and therefore it can be more participative rather than nonsensical passive note-taking.  But what I am trying to communicate lies behind those procedural details of a "Gutenberg Method".  Those details are required but they're like a Ferrari without a magnificent engine and power train. 

The essence of the Gutenberg Method that can transform a class lies in the psychological change in professor and student to the roles of coach and student-who-wants-success.  The procedures are just the framework.  They are trivial, useless, a waste of time without a commitment by instructors to change their attitudes to create a different relationship with students than they themselves suffered as undergraduates under authoritative savants (or marginal human beings with fast-moving chalk and PowerPoint).  In my opinion, the instructor must communicate this and the advantages of their changed roles for the student to the students from the first minutes of contact with members of a new class.

(The problem of the student in a course that is "required but not desired" may be greater today than in my experience.  Perhaps that is not because there are proportionately more such students but rather because rebellion per se is more the norm.  Long retired, I cannot speak from experience now, of course.  However, can unmotivated students not be made aware of how much easier future courses in any desired field will be after conquering the present required chemistry course?  Only a psychological change in the instructor, plus extra hours of labor in finding/developing optimal talking points, can prove to doubting students how a course is worth their best effort.  It is additional labor to speak with them individually, personally.  But if they sense the sincerity of such interest in helping them in their future, I would predict a major change in enough students to tip the balance in the whole class toward a genuine coach to team-member relationship.)

The following paragraph may be obsolete in today's world where "course evaluations" are routine and routinely misused by students to complain at length rather than to cooperate, where "online" keys to exams and easily-graded multiple choice exams are the norm. However, again I bold-type the difference between the professor-student cooperation in the Gutenberg Method as I developed it (and others undoubtedly have) versus impersonal actions and computer sites used as part of a pre-study, non-lecture routine. 

It is not the same to give students a thick pack of pre-study notes -- that have the same printed perfection of text supplements -- rather than something looking more personal, with hand-drawn formulas, giving the sense of the prof being behind every word of the writing. It is not the same for a student to see answers to an hour exam on a computer screen alone in a dorm room as to be given a copy of those hand-written answers on a sheet of paper at the door of the lecture room by the professor-coach.  It is not the same to have students' grades after an exam rapidly put on a course page in the university net as to have a complex exam returned personally by the professor to students at the next day of a class meeting -- with comments as to how they could have done better on an imperfect answer. It is not the same for a prof to ask sincerely for improvements in a course on which the professor and student have worked together for a year as it is for students to fill out "Evalutation Forms" for a course in which they have opposed one another for a year.  What I discovered, as described in the preceding paragraphs, is maximally successful only if it is truly, and if it is sensed by the student to be, part of a totally cooperative endeavor to conquer the subject matter: to "beat the book" together.  

I was the first professor at Occidental College to request anonymous comments from students at the end of each year about improving one's courses.  For many years, along with their comments that helped make the class better, responses included the refrain "This was a hard class, but it was also the best I have ever had in science."   Occasionally there was a substitute: "in any subject".  (The reason may well have been that they gained the sense of how much the requirement for their own individual pre-study contributed to their growth in intellectual independence.)  My practice, unique a half-century ago as far as I knew, of giving a corrected copy of the hour exam to students as they were leaving the exam room was appreciated as an important learning aid.  Similarly mentioned in anonymous comments at course-end was my inviolable rule of returning exams personally to students at the next meeting period of the class (no matter what night hours that might require from me). 

There were many unexpected results from my work via the Gutenberg Method.  In 1961 I was chosen by a faculty committee as the first scientist to be named the Occidental Faculty Award Lecturer, based on superior teaching and national recognition (e.g., publications in professional journals), and gave an elaborate demonstration lecture in Oxy's Thorne Hall. However, in 1967 the senior class moved toward establishing their own award.  This was opposed by the administration because it would seem to dilute the importance of the Faculty Award and, as a previous awardee, I was on the committee that agreed with the president.

One afternoon in my busy and noisy chemistry laboratory class, three students came to see me to talk about the new senior award and so I took them to an adjacent quiet lab that wasn't in use to present my reasons for it not to be implemented.  Before I was able to make an initial statement, the spokesperson said, "We're here to tell you that the senior class has just finished voting to give you the new Award for Outstanding Teaching".  Oh, how I wish that videocams had been invented and that there was one in that lab . . . to catch a confused but lightning-fast reversal from stating why the president and our committee were right to my stammering some kind of overwhelmed thanks. 

The result of the vote was astonishing to me.  My classes didn't average more than thirty students so that I certainly couldn't be considered a popular lecturer, whereas there were a number of brilliant and charismatic professors with large to very large classes on the campus.  (Some thirty years after that Award, at a reunion of Occidental alumni, one of those gifted and popular profs told me that he had been the runner-up for that initial award. I had never heard that any professor was privy to such details of the outcome of the secret vote. An important figure on campus, he hadn't known me well when the award was announced, so he asked a colleague, "Who is this Lambert?  Is he really that good?"  And he was kind enough in 1997 to tell me that the 1967 response was "He's very good.")

I really was not.  It was the Gutenberg Method that made me seem so.  It's an unusual situation for students to have an academic professor who is exactly like a personal athletic coach and whose obvious goal in every class session is to help them conquer the text's material and move their lives forward.  Every school day for 33 years, I couldn't wait until I got to Oxy to work with students in the class because it was just as much fun as the constant new problems in the research lab.  That's the difference between lecturing and "the Method".  I don't think it can be better than that.


